Prototyping a Modular Analog Synthesizerby Karl Pannek April 5, 2013SAE BerlinStudent Id: 18128Course: AED412Headinstructor: Boris Kummerer 
Berlin, Germany 2012Words: 5926


Preface

  Introduction

This paper constitutes an attempt to summarize the most important 
facts and information on the topic of analog, modular 
synthesizers. The range of discussed subjects involves a series 
of various perspectives, including historical, theoretical, 
electronic and practical viewpoints. 

Its goal is to convey an understanding of the inner workings of 
electronic synthesizers and their components. Moreover the reader 
is guided through the process of creating a small but functional 
modular synthesizer setup that is fun to play and experiment 
with. The intention was to investigate the possibilities and 
limits in designing and building an analog sound device for 
someone who had not been in contact with analog synthesizers 
before, let alone building electronics devices. The project was 
inspired by the film moog (Fjellestad, 2004) Fjellestad:movie (not cited)
Fjellestad:movie (not cited), a documentary about Dr. Robert 
Moog, electronic instrument pioneer and inventor.

  Chapter Overview

The chapter Historic Evolution of the Synthesizer represents the 
research on the historical background of analog synthesizers 
since the beginning of the twentieth century. It was tried to 
outline important milestones in the historic development from the 
first electronic sound generating devices until a point in time 
when manufacturers of modular synthesizers have developed a 
profitable market.

Subsequently the most important concepts of subtractive synthesis 
are summarized. A general overview over common sound generation 
and processing methods is given, whereby all concepts are 
applicable to both analog and digital synthesis. In chapter three 
these concepts are taken one step further and discussed in the 
context of electronic circuitry. Lastly the process of building 
an electronic synthesizer prototype is described.

Historic Evolution of the Synthesizer

2.1 Early Development Milestones



Around 1900 american Thaddeus Cahill initiated a new era of music 
by inventing a machine known as the Dynamophone or Thelharmonium 
. Working against incredible technical difficulties he succeeded 
to create an electrical sound generator with a weight of around 
200 metric tons. It produced alternating sine wave shaped 
currents of different audio frequencies. A modified electrical 
dynamo was used in conjunction with several specially geared 
shafts and inductors to create the signals. The Dynamophone could 
be played with a polyphonic keyboard and featured special 
acoustic horns to convert the electrical vibrations into sound . 
The timbre of the instrument was manually shaped from 
fundamentals and overtones. This is known as the principle of 
additive synthesis .


In 1924 the russian inventor Leon Theremin created the 
Aetherophone (see figure ), which would later be known as the 
Theremin. Unlike most electric instrument developed around that 
time, the Theremin had no keyboard. It was played merely by hand 
motion around two capacitive detecors, that generated electrical 
fields. These were affected by the electric capacity of the human 
body. One of these detectors was a vertical rod to control 
dynamics and the other a horizontal loop to change the pitch . “
The theatricality of its playing technique and the uniqueness of 
its sound made the Theremin the most radical musical instrument 
innovation of the early 20th century.” 

Some organ-like precursors to the synthesizer were the Ondes 
Martenot and the Trautonium, which were devised just a few years 
later. The Ondes Martenot is one of the few early electric 
instruments, that are still in concert- and theatre use in their 
original design today .

The Givelet (1929) was a commercially more successful instrument, 
since it was designed as a cheap alternative to pipe organs. 
These instruments were polyphonic and unified the concepts of the 
Pianola - a self-playing piano, controlled by pre-punched tape - 
with electronic sound genaration. The ability to program 
electronic sounds should lead the way for future devices such as 
the RCA synthesizer or computer music production in general. 
However, the Givelet was about to take a back seat, when Laurens 
Hammond published his Hammond Organ in 1935. Its technical 
operation principle is reminiscent of the Dynamophone, since it 
also involved rotating discs in a magnetic field .

The german engineer Harald Bode contributed to the design of 
several new instruments from the 1930's on, like the warbo 
formant organ (1937) or later the Melochord (1949) (see figure ). 
He was primarily interested in providing tools for a wide range 
of musicians, which is why his contributions straddled between 
the two major design traditions of new sounds versus imitation of 
traditional ones. He turned out to be one of the central figures 
in the history of electronic music, since he was also one of the 
primary technicians in establishing the classic tape music studio 
in Europe .

Bode was one of the first engineers to grasp the significance of 
the invention of the solid state transistor for sound synthesis. 
In an article published in 1961 he draws particular attention to 
the advanteges of modular design. “The versatility of 
transistor-based electronics made it possible to design any 
number of devices which could be controlled by a common set of 
voltage characteristics.” . But it was not until the early 1960's 
that major advances in electronic design took shape .

2.2 The First Synthesizers

In 1955 the laboratories of the Radio Corporation of America 
(RCA) introduced a new and very advanced machine to the public 
named the Olson-Belar Sound Synthesizer, later known as the RCA 
Mark I Music Synthesizer. It combined many means of tone 
generation and sound modification known at the time and is 
considered the first synthesizer. Mark I was built with the 
specific intention of imitating traditional instrument sounds and 
to reduce the costs of the production of popular music by 
replacing musicians. However, the machine proved unsuitable for 
its original intent and was later used completely for electronic 
music experimentation and composition . The synthesizer could not 
be played in the conventional sense in real time. Instead musical 
information had to be pre programmed as punched holes in a large 
paper tape. Harry Olson and Herbert Belar produced an improved 
Mark II Synthesizer in 1957, which the nickname Victor was given.

Around the same time the outstanding guitarist and inventor Les 
Paul became famous with his multitrack guitar recordings. He 
stimulated many innovators not only with the success of his 
multitrack recorder, but also with his methods of electronic 
sound processing. Harald Bode was so impressed and inspired by 
his work, that he built a system consisting of a number of 
electronic modules for sound modification in late 1959 through 
1960. His system featured ring modulator devices, envelope 
followers and generators, voltage-controlled amplifiers, filters 
and other . The modular concept of his device had proven 
attractive due to its versatility and predicted the more powerful 
modular synthesizers that emerged in the early 1960's . 

In 1963 Robert Moog, a passionate inventor from Ithaca, New York, 
United States, was selling kits of transistorized Theremins . In 
the documenteray moog (Fjellestad, 2004) he states that he had 
been completely obsessed with building and later designing 
Theremins since the age of 14. A year later he built a transistor 
based voltage-controlled oscillator and amplifier for the 
composer Herbert Deutsch. This led Moog to the presentation of a 
paper entitled Voltage-Controlled Electronic Music Modules at the 
sixteenth annual convention of the Audio Engineering Society, 
which had stimulated widespread interest . 

 Similar developments had been taking place at the west coast of 
the united states. Morton Subotnick and Ramon Sender started 
their career in electronic music experimentation and became 
increasingly dissatisfied with the severe limitations of 
traditional equipment at the San Francisco Tape Music Center. 
They sought out to hire a competent engineer and met Donald 
Buchla (see figure ) . Their discussions resulted in the concept 
of a modular voltage-controlled system. Buchla's design approach 
differed significantly from Moog. He rejected the idea of a 
synthesizing familiar sounds and resisted the word synthesizer 
ever since. To him it seemed much more interesting to emphasize 
new timbral possibilities and stress the complexity that could 
arise from randomness. At the same time Buchla was fascinated 
with designing control devices other than the standard keyboard, 
which Moog decided to use for playing . “Buchla has maintained 
his unique design philosophy over the years producing a series of 
highly advanced instruments often incorporating hybrid digital 
circuitry and unique control interfaces.” 

 In 1966 Robert Moog's first production model was available from 
the business R.A. Moog Co. that he had founded . At this time 
Walter Carlos, an audio engineer from New York who advised Robert 
Moog while perfecting his system, worked with Benjamin Folkman to 
produce an album of titles by Johann Sebastian Bach interpreted 
only with Moog synthesizers (see figure ). With the title 
Switched-on Bach they demonstrated the performance of the system 
so convincingly, that they hit the pop music charts and sold a 
million LP's . 

By the end of the decade two other manufacturers entered the 
market: ARP in America and EMS Ltd. in England. They had become 
major rivals for Moog and Buchla. Synthesizer production was 
dominated by these four companies for several years, whereby each 
firm struggled for a major share of a highly lucrative, rapidly 
expanding market .

Theory of Subtractive Synthesis

During the last century different kinds of synthesis methods have 
emerged. The subtractive synthesis however, appears to be the 
most common one. It is a method of sound synthesis, where 
partials of the initially generated signal are attenuated with a 
filter to change the timbre of the sound. But how can these 
sounds actually be synthesized? And what exactly does a filter 
do? These questions will be examined in the following.

3.1 Sources

Acoustic events can generally be divided in two groups: noises 
and tones. Whereas tones - as opposed to noise - are classified 
as sound waves, that have determined set of frequencies, which 
oscillate in a sinoidal manner. However this is only a 
theoretical classification, since most natural sounds are a 
combination of the two . 

3.1.1 Wave Oscillation

At the root of every artificial tone generating system there is 
an element that produces an oscillation. This element is mostly 
described as the oscillator, which represents the very source of 
what can be heard eventually. The oscillator produces a wave, 
that moves between an amplitude-minima and -maxima. Its waveform 
(shape of the wave) determines the overtone structure and 
therefore the timbre of this basic source sound. Oscillators 
often provide several waveforms between which it is possible to 
switch back and forth (see figure ). The pitch of the output 
signal is defined by the frequency of the wave and must oscillate 
between 20 Hz and 20 kHz in order for it to be audible to humans 
. The output signal can later be processed and modulated in 
several ways.

Oscillators that swing at an infrasonic frequency - meaning a 
frequency so low, that it is not hearable anymore - are called 
low frequency oscillators (LFO). They are used to control 
parameters of different components of the synthesizer 
periodically. For example to influence the pitch of another 
oscillator to get a vibrato - or the amplitude to get a tremolo 
effect. Some oscillators frequencies range from very low to very 
high, in which case a distinction between oscillator and LFO is 
unnecessary.

  Characteristics of Common Waveforms

Sine The most basic waveform is the sine wave. It contains no 
overtones at all and sounds round and dull.

Sawtooth The sawtooth, also known as saw or ramp waveform sounds 
very bright, sometimes described as trumpet-like . It consist of 
a complete series of harmonics and is therefore well suited for 
subtractive synthesis. There are two types of sawtooth waves: 
rising and descending. 

Triangle Composed of only odd harmonics, the triangle wave has a 
much softer, flute-like sound.

Square Also known as rectangle, the square wave also consists of 
odd harmonics only, but the level distribution of its harmonics 
is different. Its timbre reminds of woodwind instruments . A true 
square wave has a 50 % duty cycle - equal high and low periods. 
However, oscillators often feature a pulse width parameter, 
trough which the high-low time ratio can be accessed. This has a 
distinct influence on the wave's timbre. In this case, the square 
becomes a pulse waveform. 

3.1.2 Noise Generation

A different approach on the creation of source audio material is 
resembled by noise generators. “In very loose terms, noise is a 
complex waveform with components of every frequency, each 
attaining a completely random amplitude at any give instant.” 

  Noise Types

White Equal power density in any band of the frequency spectrum

Pink Power density decreases by 3dB per octave; also referred to 
as 1/f noise

Brown Power density decreases by 6dB per octave; also referred to 
as 1/f²noise

The names of these noise types were derived from the spectral 
distribution of the correspondingly colored light .

3.1.3 Triggering Notes

In order to use the previously discussed signal generators in a 
musical context, it is necessary to cut off their stationary 
signals when no note is being played. This is accomplished by 
routing the output signal of the generator to an amplifier and 
providing it with a gate signal. The source of the gate signal 
can be a keyboard or a sequencer, which would also send a pitch 
value to the oscillator to set its frequency .

3.2 Signal Processing

In their raw shape the mentioned source signals sound rather 
underwhelming, since they produce fixed timbres lacking of 
distinctive qualities . To get a more interesting sound, the 
signal can be manipulated in acoustic color or dynamics by one or 
more processing units.

3.2.1 Dynamic Envelopes

The most important component responsible for shaping the dynamic 
structure of a note is the envelope. It is triggered by the gate 
on/off signal and outputs a control signal that fades between the 
different state phases of a note. The rapidity of these changes 
is adjusted by parameters, that represent these states. Its 
output signal can be used to control an amplifier and therefore 
shape the dynamic structure of the note. The most common envelope 
type is the ADSR, which stands for attack, decay, sustain, 
release. 

Attack Sets how long the envelope signal rises after a note was 
triggered

Decay Sets how long it takes for the envelope signal to drop from 
its maximum to the sustain level after the attack phase was 
completed

Sustain Sets the output level for the time period after the decay 
phase and before the gate signal was terminated

Release Sets the length of the fade out after the note has ended

Envelopes can also be used to control other parameters, for 
example the cutoff frequency of a filter (see chapter). 

3.2.2 Filtering <sub:filters>

The filter is the processing component responsible for the sound 
changes, that people associate with the typical synthesizer sound 
. They remove a spectrum of frequencies from their input signal 
above or below the cutoff frequency and are often used in 
conjunction with an envelope or LFO modulation on the cutoff. 
This cutoff frequency is an important parameter determining the 
frequency at which the signal begins to be attenuated. The slope 
of the filter determines how abrupt frequencies are being cut. 
Another common parameter is called resonance. It controls the 
level of a feedback loop, emphasizing the timbre at the cutoff 
frequency.

Filters can generally be divided into two categories: Low pass 
and high pass (also called high cut and low cut). To get a band 
pass, low- and high pass are connected in series. When connected 
in parallel, they become a band stop or band reject filter. 
Lastly the all pass filter should be mentioned, which does not 
change the frequency spectrum but merely influences the phase of 
the signal around its cutoff . 

3.3 Controllers

Controllers can be characterized by the way of how humans 
interact with them and how their output signal is applied in 
controlling other components of the system . A keyboard for 
example is a manual controller, since it is the movement of the 
players fingers which are translated into a voltage or control 
value and then used to control pitch and amplitude of a note. The 
same applies for rotary knobs and faders or touch sensitive 
surfaces. 

Sequencers on the other hand are programmable controllers. They 
are not dependent upon a manual interaction except for their 
programming and activation. 

3.4 The Modular Approach

A modular synthesizer is an instrument, where sound generators, 
processors and control facilities are presented in separate 
independent entities called modules. These modules are not wired 
in a preconceived way, but are connected with patch chords. The 
second essential aspect is the concept of inter-modular 
controllability, with which modules may modulate or regulate 
other modules. 

Analog Synthesis

The previously discussed theoretical concepts can generally be 
applied to both analog and digital synthesizers. In this chapter 
some of these concepts are transferred into the electronic 
context.

4.1 General

In digital synthesis audio signals and control signals are often 
being differentiated. This is because computing power can be 
saved by limiting the sample rate for control signals, since they 
usually only require a fraction of the amount of sampling values 
to get acceptable results.

In the area of analog modular synthesis it is important to know 
that signals are nothing but alternating and/or direct currents 
usually with voltages ranging from -5 to +5 volts. That is why 
there is no difference between audio and control signals. This 
has a great impact on the extend of possibilities especially in 
modular systems. One of the consequences is that an oscillator 
can control the frequency of a second oscillator with its output 
signal. This is known as frequency-modulation or FM synthesis.

However, when combining or mixing control and audio signals one 
should be aware of the following phrase, stated by Donald Buchla: 
“DC offset doesn't make any difference in the sound domain but it 
makes a big difference in the structural domain, whereas harmonic 
distortion makes very little difference in the control area but 
it can be very significant in the audio areas.” 

4.2 Modules

In a modular synthesizer setup, all sound generating and 
processing modules are aggregated and connected to a central 
power supply with a common ground. Among the modular components 
the signals are transferred via patch chords. The modules should 
be engineered to have the lowest possible output impedance and a 
relatively high input impedance. A common impedance ratio is 
1:100. 

Below, the basic circuitry principles of some essential 
synthesizer components will be examined.

4.2.1 Oscillator <sub:electronic-oscillator>

  Natural Resonance 

The most simple form of an oscillator circuit producing a 
sawtooth signal can be realized with just a few parts (see figure 
). A current charges a capacitor at a certain rate. Between the 
electrodes of the capacitor a voltage potential rises. Meanwhile 
the voltage is constantly compared with a reference voltage by a 
detector (Schmitt trigger). Once it reaches the predefined 
threshold, an electronic switch (transistor) is activated. This 
switch short-circuits the capacitor and discharges it, causing 
the output voltage to drop back to its initial potential. This is 
happening continuously, whereas the rate of the repetition 
determines the frequency of the generated signal. 

To get a triangle shaped output signal, the current source can be 
reversed in response to the detector (see figure ) .

These two waveforms can be wave-shaped into to other common basic 
waveforms. All required wave shaping methods are fairly simple 
and their accuracy is sufficient for musical purposes. The sine 
wave is an exception, because there is no simple electronic 
method of creating a pure sine wave. What is generally used is a 
rounded triangle, which gives at least 1 % of harmonic 
distortion. To get a purer sine wave, the harmonics can be 
filtered out with a voltage-controlled filter following in the 
signal chain .

  Voltage Control

How fast the capacitor is charged is determined by the intensity 
of the current that it is being charged with. This current is 
being extracted from a voltage, which of course can be a control 
voltage.

However, creating a stable voltage-controlled oscillator design 
presents one of the toughest challenges for musical engineers, 
because the human ear is extremely sensitive to pitch changes. 
Also compositional processes like multitrack recording plainly 
reveal errors in pitch relationships . The voltage to pitch 
distribution curve of an oscillator is determined by its 
exponential response to the voltage at its CV input. In a volt 
per octave system an increase by 1 volt at the input must result 
in a doubling of the oscillation frequency at the output. Thus 
octave purity is achieved. 

A major issue that oscillator designers have to face are 
temperature influenced variations of the electrical parameters of 
the system, causing the oscillator pitch to drift when 
temperature changes occur. To overcome this problem some kind of 
temperature compensation should be implemented.

4.2.2 Filter <sub:electronic-filter>

  Passive Filter

Filter circuits are generally based upon the fact that the 
transfer of alternating currents through a capacitor becomes 
increasingly weak below a certain frequency. A signal simply 
passed through a capacitor resembles a high pass filter. If the 
capacitor is connected to the ground the high frequencies are 
short circuited and low frequencies remain in the signal path. To 
control the charging time of the capacitor and therefore the 
cutoff frequency a resistor is added. This is referred to as a 
resistor-capacitor (RC) element. This simple circuit represents a 
passive, first-order filter with a roll-off of 6 dB per octave. 
To increase the slope of the filter multiple RC elements can be 
connected in series . 



Nevertheless this poses some disadvantages, because the filter 
stages influence each other. The resistor of the first filter 
affects the resistance of the second. This can be dealt with by 
designing the second filter to have a much higher impedance. 
Unfortunately a high impedance circuit is much more prone to 
interferences and signal noise .

  Active Filter

 A better and more flexible solution is the usage of an active 
filter design, like the Sallen-Key filter (see figure ). This is 
a common second-order filter, which is applicable as a low or 
high pass, whereby only resistors and capacitors have to be 
swapped . Resistor (R₂) and capacitor (C₂) can be identified to 
form a low pass section . 

To be able to change the cutoff frequency via voltage control the 
frequency defining resistor could be replaced with a voltage 
controlled resistor .

4.2.3 Envelope Generator

 The envelope generator is based on the principle of slew-rate 
limiting. The rapid changes in the level of the gate voltage can 
be decelerated by again using a resistor-capacitor element. By 
using a potentiometer in the place of the resistor the charging 
time and therefore the speed of the voltage alteration can be 
adjusted. To get a typical attack-release (AR) envelope the 
charge and discharge times should be adjusted separately. To 
achieve this two preceding potentiometers with a diode each 
should be connected. The diodes must be pointed in opposite 
directions (see figure ). 

Building a Modular Synthesizer

5.1 Introduction <sec:building-introduction>

It is relatively easy to find circuits to construct simple 
oscillators and filters based on the fairly comprehensible 
concepts of resonant circuits and RC elements (see chapter). 
However, as their flexibility and 
capabilities increase (e.g. controlling the frequency of an 
oscillator with 1 volt per octave), the circuits tend to get 
exceedingly complex, requiring solid expertise in electronics.

This is why it was decided to switch to the usage of 
pre-designed, professionally manufactured circuit boards for this 
project as opposed to elaborating all the circuits on perfboards 
as originally intended. This made the goal of intermodular 
controllability attainable more easyily. The downside of this 
approach are higher costs for boards and parts. However, the 
quality of the end-product is impressing. Also the time saving 
using this strategy is not to be underestimated.

During the research phase of this project it came to the authors 
attention, that a modular synthesizer building workshop would be 
taking place in Berlin monthly. It is organized by a spanish 
collective from barcelona called befaco (). At the workshop it is 
possible to acquire various module kits containing all necessary 
parts and also receive tips and support while assembling them. 

Due to budget limitations, it was tried to arrange a smaller 
setup that would still offer lots of sound design possibilities.

5.2 Formats and Interfaces

There are several formats for module sizes, power supply plugs or 
patch chord connectors which emerged out of the production lines 
of various module manufacturers. For example Doepfer's modules 
are only compatible with their EuroRack cases, with a height of 
128.5mm. These EuroRack modules use jack connectors for patching. 
In the DIY modular synth scene it is a common practice to use 
banana jack connectors instead of mini jack for patching. Those 
have the possibility of stacking the connectors on top of each 
other and split the signal without having to use a multiplier 
module. In this project the modules are EuroRack size, but use 
banana plugs. 

5.3 Building

To get started with building electronic equipment, one has to 
obtain some tools first. This includes a soldering iron - best 
with adjustable temperature, a role of quality soldering tin, a 
desoldering pump and pliers for cutting and bending wire. 

Soldering is a process of mounting electronic parts onto a 
circuit board by heating up board and component and then melting 
the soldering tin into the joint. A good temperature for the 
soldering iron is between 300° and 350° celsius. The iron should 
not be pressed onto the joint for too long, because there is a 
risk of destroying the component if it is sensitive to heat.

5.4 Power Supply and Case

For the power unit a universal power supply circuit was chosen 
from Robert Sontheimers audio circuit technology book  and 
mounted onto a perfboard. Instead of the 7815 and 7915 voltage 
regulator ICs the 7812 and 7912 were used in order to get a +/-12 
volt power supply with a center tap for the ground. The modules 
can be connected to the four male 16-pin flat ribbon connectors, 
that were added to make the power supply compliant to the 
EuroRack standard. Another possibility would be to make a flying 
bus board by attaching those connectors to a flat ribbon cable 
that lies in the case. Or even just fix female connectors to the 
cable and plug them directly into the modules. Additionally it is 
planned to add an IEC socket and a power switch for comfortable 
on and off switching and more steady starting current.

The case is a simple rack constructed from a few pieces of wood 
that are held together by 19 inch rails equipped with thread 
rails to fasten the modules.



5.5 Front Panels 

The panels for all modules were made from pre-cut aluminum plates 
with a white varnish. The labels for knobs and banana sockets are 
printed on the plates with a method, that is similar to homemade 
circuit board etching[footnote:
For etching the template would be transferred onto a copper board 
and put into an acid bath.
]. A mirror-inverted label template (see figure ) is printed onto 
a piece of high gloss paper for inkjet printers - but with a 
laser printer. It is cut and placed face down onto the upper side 
of the panel. By thoroughly pressing down a hot flat iron (for 
ironing clothes) onto the panel for a few minutes, the toner 
cartridge particles move to the panel. The paper residues need to 
be removed by placing the panel in some water and rubbing them 
off with a sponge. Afterwards the panel is sealed with 
transparent lacquer. Once the panel is dried, the holes for the 
knobs, switches, etc. can be prepunched and drilled. Lastly all 
boreholes are deburred. 



5.6 BF-22 Filter 

This module (shown in figure ) is an extended copy of the filter 
from the legendary Korg MS-20 and is based upon the principle of 
the Sallen-Key filter (see chapter). It 
combines two linkable filter stages in one module. Each stage 
features cutoff and resonance knobs and the corresponding CV 
inputs, whereas the cutoff frequency input can be attenuated and 
inverted with one knob representing modulation depth (labeled: 
X-1 ... 0 ... X1). The HP/LP switch determines, if the filter is 
used in high pass or low pass mode. 

When turning resonance up, at one point the filter begins to 
self-resonate at the given cutoff frequency, which means that the 
filter can also be utilized as an oscillator.

 Therefore a volt per octave input for the cutoff control 
voltage was added, to be able to control the oscillating 
frequency in a musical context. 

A look at the oscilloscope shows a sine like waveform. Turning 
the resonance to the maximum, the filter goes into distortion and 
the wave becomes more square causing the sound to get more rough. 
The amount of distortion is visually represented by a red LED. 

Below the front panel sits an interface board where the knobs, 
switches, LEDs and banana sockets are mounted to. A thirty pin 
socket connects the interface board to the main circuit board 
(see figure ), which contains the signal processing circuitry. 
The socket for the power supply sits on the very bottom.


5.7 Output

The output module is responsible for transforming the hot[footnote:
The term hot signal is used commonly to describe signals with a 
relatively high voltage.
] synthesizer signal to a standard line level. It can be used in 
a dual mono mode, picking up two separate output signals from tip 
and ring of the 6.35 mm output jack. The mono switch splits the 
signal to tip and ring. The phones output provides the output 
signal optimized for headphones.

Additionally the module features a switch which activates a high 
pass filter. The idea is to be able to protect speaker systems 
from high energy bass signals. In the lower section 3 banana to 
jack patch sockets were added.





5.8 MIDI Input

 This module is still at an experimental stage. The idea was to 
use a digital microprocessor to be able to connect a keyboard to 
the synthesizer and play it via MIDI. To achieve this the 
implementation of an Arduino Uno was planned. Arduino is an 
open-source electronics prototyping platform with a ATMega168 
microprocessor at its heart. 

Conveniently the Arduino must be provided with a 9-12 volt power 
supply, which made the process of connecting it to the 
synthesizers power supply easy. Only the appropriate plug 
connection had to be put together.

The MIDI input communication has been established by the usage of 
a 6N138 optocoupler, that isolates the Arduino circuit from the 
MIDI device (see figure ). On the software side the Arduino MIDI 
Library v3.2 has been included, which takes care of interpreting 
the serial digital data arriving at the Arduino's RX pin. 

What needs to be done next is converting the desired MIDI 
messages into control voltages. The gate voltage would be easy to 
implement, because it can be represented by a digital on/off 
state. The realization of the pitch control voltage presents 
itself as more complex, since the Arduino cannot output analog 
voltage values at its output pins but only digital states. One 
way would be to create a high frequency pulse width modulated 
signal and adding a low pass filter to convert it to a stationary 
voltage. This may have the disadvantage of getting a slight 
portamento effect though. The other way would be to convert the 
possible 128 note values of the note on message into seven binary 
values. These would be transmitted onto seven respective output 
pins. A digital to analog converter (DAC) would then generate the 
analog output voltage.

Regardless of which method is chosen, at the end the voltage 
should be scaled to conform the 1 volt per octave interface.

Conclusion

  Summary 

This paper is the result of a research on the topics of history, 
theory and electronics of analog synthesis. Of course in all of 
the discussed subjects only the surfaces could be scratched. Even 
only the field of active filter circuitry can (and does) fill 
entire books. Accompanying this research a small synthesizer 
prototype has been set up, making use of the knowledge acquired 
during the research.

  Results

The objective to create a functional prototype can be considered 
a complete success. The synthesizer that was built is a lot of 
fun to experiment with, which was one of the initial goals also. 
Even though it is practically just a self oscillating filter, it 
offers a lot of possibilities for experimental sound design. Due 
to the fact that the banana plugs are stackable, the two output 
signals can be split several times to voltage control resonance 
and cutoff of each filter stage. Also various types of feedback 
can be generated. 

This project provides a great basis for further sound 
experimentation. Because of its modular setup, there is a lot of 
space for further modules, although the requirements for power 
supply and case size will increase with the number of modules. 
The next step will be the construction of an oscillator module as 
soon as time and monetary means allow it.

  A Personal Journey

As a trained programmer and web application developer the field 
of electronic engineering always seemed appealing to me. Hence 
the assignment for a research paper during the audio engineering 
course at SAE Institute seemed like a welcome opportunity to dive 
into the realm of building electronic devices in the context of 
sound generation and modification.

The process of writing this paper has been an unexpectedly 
rewarding and inspiring experience, pushing the boundaries of my 
own musical and technical understanding. Most notably the 
concepts of free composition - meaning allowing randomness and 
therefore putting oneself in the position of reacting to a 
musical system, influencing it in terms of tendencies, rather 
than controlling it with a predetermined mindset - has been 
something that really changed my perception of musical 
creativity. This for me seems much more attainable in the analog 
world, where electrical components and signal chains can be 
brought to their tipping points, resulting in an unpredictable 
outcome. That is where sound exploration begins, which is a 
totally different experience than knowing what will happen. 
Virtual digital environments, which I was familiar with on the 
other hand, generally seem to tend persuade the user to feel in 
control at all times.

  Acknowledgment

At first I want to thank Fabian Gawlick and Sebastian Metzner for 
introducing me to the topics of electronic engineering and sound 
synthesis. I would like to thank Edmund Heineke Jaek for teaching 
me a lot about amplification and helping me with the power supply 
for the prototype. I am very grateful to Diego, Jano and Victor 
from befaco for their awesome workshop and for helping me with a 
lot of tips and literature on the discussed topics. A big thank 
you goes out to Derek Holzer, who gave me an extended 
introduction into his self constructed modular system and shared 
some valuable sound design concepts. Also I want to thank Richard 
Pannek, David Markwart, Roosa Hämäläinnen and Vicki Schmatolla 
for proof reading and their feedback on this paper. Lastly I want 
to thank SAE institute for making this project possible.



List of Figures


Declaration of academic honesty

I hereby declare that in the attached submission I have not 
presented anyone else’s work, in whole or in part, as my own 
using only the admitted resources. Where I have taken advantage 
of the work of others, I have given full acknowledgement.





